Add blog for PersistentVolume last phase transition time (#41981)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2023-08-15-pv-last-phase-transtition-time.md

Reviewer: Please change the filename to match the publication date (we don't yet have a lint for this, sorry).

Author: Sure, changed.

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes 1.28: Persistent Volume Last Phase Transition Time"
date: 2023-08-15T10:00:00-08:00
slug: kubernetes-1-28-persistent-volume-last-phase-transition-time
---

**Author:** Roman Bednář (Red Hat)

In Kubernetes v1.28, we are introducing a new alpha feature that aims to improve PersistentVolume (PV) management and help cluster administrators gain better insights into the lifecycle of PVs.

> With the addition of the LastPhaseTransitionTime field in the PV status, administrators will be able to track the last time a PV transitioned to a different phase, allowing for more efficient and informed resource management.

Reviewer 2: Please use user facing field names when possible.
This blog is for users, not for developers.
A user doesn't need to know that the field is named as `LastPhaseTransistionTime` in Go lang and the first character must be upper case for it to be treated public.
Instead, he or she need to know the field name as `lastPhaseTransistionTime`.

Author: Acknowledged, I've applied your suggestions and replaced all other references to that field to be lower case. Thank you for review.

Whether it's transitioning from "Pending" to "Bound," "Bound" to "Released," or any other phase transition, the LastPhaseTransitionTime will be recorded.
For newly created PVs the phase will be set to "Pending" and the LastPhaseTransitionTime will be recorded as well.

This feature allows cluster administrators to:

1. Implement Retention Policies

   With the LastPhaseTransitionTime, administrators can now track when a PV was last used or transitioned to the "Released" phase.
   This information can be crucial for implementing retention policies to clean up resources that have been in the "Released" phase for a specific duration.
   For example, it is now trivial to write a script or a policy that deletes all PVs that have been in "Released" phase for a week.

2. Monitor Storage Health

   By analyzing the phase transition times of PVs, administrators can monitor storage health more effectively.
   For example, they can identify PVs that have been in the "Pending" phase for an unusually long time, which may indicate underlying issues with the storage provisioner.

## How to use it

> The LastPhaseTransitionTime field is currently alpha so it requires `PersistentVolumeLastPhaseTransitionTime` feature gate to be enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The LastPhaseTransitionTime field is currently alpha so it requires
the `PersistentVolumeLastPhaseTransitionTime` feature gate to be enabled.
```

> If you want to test the feature whilst it's alpha, you need to enable this feature gate in the kube-controller-manager and the kube-apiserver.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to test the feature whilst it's alpha, you need to enable this feature gate on the `kube-controller-manager` and the `kube-apiserver`.
```

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes 1.28: Persistent Volume Last Phase Transition Time"
date: 2023-08-15T10:00:00-08:00
slug: kubernetes-1-28-persistent-volume-last-phase-transition-time
---

**Author:** Roman Bednář (Red Hat)

> In Kubernetes v1.28, we are introducing a new alpha feature that aims to improve PersistentVolume (PV) management and help cluster administrators gain better insights into the lifecycle of PVs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes v1.28, we have introduced a new alpha feature that aims to improve PersistentVolume (PV)
storage management and help cluster administrators gain better insights into the lifecycle of PVs.
```

> With the addition of the lastPhaseTransitionTime field in the PV status, administrators will be able to track the last time a PV transitioned to a different phase, allowing for more efficient and informed resource management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the addition of the `lastPhaseTransitionTime` field into the status of a PV, administrators will be able to track the last time a PV transitioned to a different [phase](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#phase), allowing for more efficient and informed resource management.
```

> ## Why do we need new PV field

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why do we need new PV field? {#why-new-field}
```

PersistentVolumes in Kubernetes play a crucial role in providing storage resources to workloads running in the cluster.

> However, managing these PVs effectively can be challenging, especially when it comes to determining the last time a PV transitioned between different phases, such as "Pending," "Bound," or "Released."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, managing these PVs effectively can be challenging, especially when it comes to determining the last time a PV transitioned between different phases, such as `Pending`, `Bound` or `Released`.
```

Administrators often need to know when a PV was last used or transitioned to certain phases, for instance, to implement retention policies, perform cleanup, or monitor storage health.

> In the past, Kubernetes users have faced data loss issues when using the "Delete" retain policy and had to resort to the safer "Retain" policy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the past, Kubernetes users have faced data loss issues when using the `Delete` retain policy and had to resort to the safer `Retain` policy.
```

> By introducing the lastPhaseTransitionTime field, we aim to provide a more generic solution that can be used for various use cases,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By introducing the `lastPhaseTransitionTime` field, we aim to provide a more generic solution that can be used for various use cases,
```

including manual cleanup based on the time a volume was last used or producing alerts based on phase transition times.

## How lastPhaseTransitionTime helps

> The new lastPhaseTransitionTime field added to the PV status is updated every time a PV transitions from one phase to another.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Provided you've enabled the feature gate (see [How to use it](#how-to-use-it), the new `.status.lastPhaseTransitionTime` field of a PersistentVolume (PV)
is updated every time that PV transitions from one phase to another.
``

> Whether it's transitioning from "Pending" to "Bound," "Bound" to "Released," or any other phase transition, the lastPhaseTransitionTime will be recorded.
> For newly created PVs the phase will be set to "Pending" and the lastPhaseTransitionTime will be recorded as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whether it's transitioning from `Pending` to `Bound`, `Bound` to `Released`, or any other phase transition, the `lastPhaseTransitionTime` will be recorded.
For newly created PVs the phase will be set to `Pending` and the `lastPhaseTransitionTime` will be recorded as well.
```

This feature allows cluster administrators to:

1. Implement Retention Policies

>    With the lastPhaseTransitionTime, administrators can now track when a PV was last used or transitioned to the "Released" phase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   With the `lastPhaseTransitionTime`, administrators can now track when a PV was last used or transitioned to the `Released` phase.
```

>    This information can be crucial for implementing retention policies to clean up resources that have been in the "Released" phase for a specific duration.
>    For example, it is now trivial to write a script or a policy that deletes all PVs that have been in "Released" phase for a week.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This information can be crucial for implementing retention policies to clean up resources that have been in the `Released` phase for a specific duration.
   For example, it is now trivial to write a script or a policy that deletes all PVs that have been in the `Released` phase for a week.
```

2. Monitor Storage Health

   By analyzing the phase transition times of PVs, administrators can monitor storage health more effectively.

>    For example, they can identify PVs that have been in the "Pending" phase for an unusually long time, which may indicate underlying issues with the storage provisioner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   For example, they can identify PVs that have been in the `Pending` phase for an unusually long time, which may indicate underlying issues with the storage provisioner.
```

## How to use it

> The lastPhaseTransitionTime field is currently alpha so it requires

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `lastPhaseTransitionTime` field is alpha for Kubernetes v1.28, so it requires
```

the `PersistentVolumeLastPhaseTransitionTime` feature gate to be enabled.

If you want to test the feature whilst it's alpha, you need to enable this feature gate on the `kube-controller-manager` and the `kube-apiserver`.

Use the `--feature-gates` command line argument:

```
--feature-gates="...,PersistentVolumeLastPhaseTransitionTime=true"
```

> Keep in mind that the feature enablement does not have immediate effect, the new field will be populated whenever a PV is updated and transitions phases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keep in mind that the feature enablement does not have immediate effect; the new field will be populated whenever a PV is updated and transitions between phases.
```

Administrators can then access the new field through the PV status, which can be retrieved using standard Kubernetes API calls or through Kubernetes client libraries.

> Here is an example of how to retrieve the lastPhaseTransitionTime for a specific PV using the kubectl command-line tool:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example of how to retrieve the `lastPhaseTransitionTime` for a specific PV using the `kubectl` command-line tool:
```

> ```

Reviewer: Optionally: mark this as shell

Author: Added.

kubectl get pv <pv-name> -o jsonpath='{.status.lastPhaseTransitionTime}'
```

## Going forward

> This feature is initially introduced as an alpha feature and will be behind a feature gate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature was initially introduced as an alpha feature, behind a feature gate that is disabled by default.
```

> During the alpha phase, we will collect feedback from the community and address any issues or improvements identified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the alpha phase, we (Kubernetes SIG Storage) will collect feedback from the end user community and address any issues or improvements identified.
```

Once sufficient feedback has been received, or no complaints are received the feature can move to beta.
The beta phase will allow us to further validate the implementation and ensure its stability.

> At least two Kubernetes releases will be available between the beta phase and the general availability (GA) release.

Reviewer: Is this true?
```markdown
At least two Kubernetes releases will happen between the release where this field graduates
to beta and the release that graduates the field to general availability (GA). That means that
the earliest release where this field could be generally available is Kubernetes 1.32,
likely to be scheduled for early 2025.
```

Author: This suggestion is more accurate as there is no guarantee on the release count in beta phase, thanks!

## Getting involved

We always welcome new contributors so if you would like to get involved you can
join our [Kubernetes Storage Special-Interest-Group](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-storage) (SIG).

> If you would like to share feedback, you can do so on our [public Slack channel](https://app.slack.com/client/T09NY5SBT/C09QZFCE5).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you would like to share feedback, you can do so on our [public Slack channel](https://app.slack.com/client/T09NY5SBT/C09QZFCE5). If you're not already part of that Slack workspace, you can visit https://slack.k8s.io/ for an invitation.
```

In the past, Kubernetes users have faced data loss issues when using the "Delete" retain policy and had to resort to the safer "Retain" policy.
By introducing the LastPhaseTransitionTime field, we aim to provide a more generic solution that can be used for various use cases,
including manual cleanup based on the time a volume was last used or producing alerts based on phase transition times.

## How LastPhaseTransitionTime helps

The new LastPhaseTransitionTime field added to the PV status is updated every time a PV transitions from one phase to another.
Whether it's transitioning from "Pending" to "Bound," "Bound" to "Released," or any other phase transition, the LastPhaseTransitionTime will be recorded.
For newly created PVs the phase will be set to "Pending" and the LastPhaseTransitionTime will be recorded as well.

This feature allows cluster administrators to:

1. Implement Retention Policies

   With the LastPhaseTransitionTime, administrators can now track when a PV was last used or transitioned to the "Released" phase.

>    This information can be crucial for implementing retention policies to clean up resources that have been in the "Released" phase for a specific duration.

Reviewer 3: Show how crucial it is. "For example, it's trivial to write a script or a policy that deletes all PVs that are in Released phase for 1 week".

Author: Example added.

2. Monitor Storage Health

   By analyzing the phase transition times of PVs, administrators can monitor storage health more effectively.
   For example, they can identify PVs that have been in the "Pending" phase for an unusually long time, which may indicate underlying issues with the storage provisioner.

3. Produce Alerts and Metrics

>    The LastPhaseTransitionTime can be utilized to produce alerts and metrics.

Reviewer 3: If we need such metrics, we need code in KCM / PV controller that would emit them. I'm not sure it's a goal of this feature.

---
layout: blog

> title: "Persistent Volume Last Phase Transition Time"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: PersistentVolume Last Phase Transition Time in Kubernetes
```
or
```suggestion
title: PersistentVolume Last Phase Transition Time
```

> date: 2023-09-20

Reviewer 4: We need a new publication date?

Author: New date is set, is Oct 23 ok?

Reviewer: Sounds good, thanks.

slug: persistent-volume-last-phase-transition-time
---

**Author:** Roman Bednář (Red Hat)

> In Kubernetes v1.28, we have introduced a new alpha feature that aims to improve PersistentVolume (PV)

Reviewer 4: In Kubernetes v1.28 -> In the recent Kubernetes v1.28 release

Author: Changed.

> In the recent Kubernetes v1.28 release, we have introduced a new alpha feature that aims to improve PersistentVolume (PV)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the recent Kubernetes v1.28 release, we (SIG Storage) introduced a new alpha feature that aims to improve PersistentVolume (PV)
```

Please make it clear that _we_ is not Red Hat.

storage management and help cluster administrators gain better insights into the lifecycle of PVs.

> With the addition of the `lastPhaseTransitionTime` field into the status of a PV, administrators will be able to track the last time a PV transitioned to a different [phase](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#phase), allowing for more efficient and informed resource management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the addition of the `lastPhaseTransitionTime` field into the status of a PV,
cluster administrators are now able to track the last time a PV transitioned to a different
[phase](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#phase), allowing for more efficient
and informed resource management.
```

## Why do we need new PV field? {#why-new-field}

PersistentVolumes in Kubernetes play a crucial role in providing storage resources to workloads running in the cluster.

> However, managing these PVs effectively can be challenging, especially when it comes to determining the last time a PV transitioned between different phases, such as `Pending`, `Bound` or `Released`.
> Administrators often need to know when a PV was last used or transitioned to certain phases, for instance, to implement retention policies, perform cleanup, or monitor storage health.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, managing these PVs effectively can be challenging, especially when it comes
to determining the last time a PV transitioned between different phases, such as
`Pending`, `Bound` or `Released`.
Administrators often need to know when a PV was last used or transitioned to certain
phases; for instance, to implement retention policies, perform cleanup, or monitor storage health.
```

In the past, Kubernetes users have faced data loss issues when using the `Delete` retain policy and had to resort to the safer `Retain` policy.

> By introducing the `lastPhaseTransitionTime` field, we aim to provide a more generic solution that can be used for various use cases,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we planned the work to introduce the new `lastPhaseTransitionTime` field, we
wanted to provide a more generic solution that can be used for various use cases,
```

is updated every time that PV transitions from one phase to another.
``
Whether it's transitioning from `Pending` to `Bound`, `Bound` to `Released`, or any other phase transition, the `lastPhaseTransitionTime` will be recorded.
For newly created PVs the phase will be set to `Pending` and the `lastPhaseTransitionTime` will be recorded as well.

This feature allows cluster administrators to:

1. Implement Retention Policies

   With the `lastPhaseTransitionTime`, administrators can now track when a PV was last used or transitioned to the `Released` phase.
   This information can be crucial for implementing retention policies to clean up resources that have been in the `Released` phase for a specific duration.
   For example, it is now trivial to write a script or a policy that deletes all PVs that have been in the `Released` phase for a week.

2. Monitor Storage Health

   By analyzing the phase transition times of PVs, administrators can monitor storage health more effectively.
   For example, they can identify PVs that have been in the `Pending` phase for an unusually long time, which may indicate underlying issues with the storage provisioner.

## How to use it

> The `lastPhaseTransitionTime` field is alpha for Kubernetes v1.28, so it requires

Reviewer 4: The `lastPhaseTransitionTime` field is alpha starting from Kubernetes v1.28, ...

Author: Changed.

```shell
kubectl get pv <pv-name> -o jsonpath='{.status.lastPhaseTransitionTime}'
```

## Going forward

This feature was initially introduced as an alpha feature, behind a feature gate that is disabled by default.
During the alpha phase, we (Kubernetes SIG Storage) will collect feedback from the end user community and address any issues or improvements identified.

Once sufficient feedback has been received, or no complaints are received the feature can move to beta.
The beta phase will allow us to further validate the implementation and ensure its stability.

At least two Kubernetes releases will happen between the release where this field graduates
to beta and the release that graduates the field to general availability (GA). That means that
the earliest release where this field could be generally available is Kubernetes 1.32,
likely to be scheduled for early 2025.

## Getting involved

We always welcome new contributors so if you would like to get involved you can
join our [Kubernetes Storage Special-Interest-Group](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-storage) (SIG).

> If you would like to share feedback, you can do so on our [public Slack channel](https://app.slack.com/client/T09NY5SBT/C09QZFCE5). If you're not already part of that Slack workspace, you can visit https://slack.k8s.io/ for an invitation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you would like to share feedback, you can do so on our
[public Slack channel](https://app.slack.com/client/T09NY5SBT/C09QZFCE5).
If you're not already part of that Slack workspace, you can visit https://slack.k8s.io/ for an invitation.
```
